docs: architecture document (#28)
web3-storage/w3filecoin: docs/architecture.md

- CAR file is written into web3.storage’s `carpark` bucket in R2
- The piece commP and piece size are computed for the CAR file

[web3.storage](http://web3.storage) relies on Spade as a broker to get their user data into Filecoin Storage Providers. Currently, Spade requires a Filecoin Piece with size between 15.875GiB and 31.75GiB to create deals with Filecoin Storage Providers. Moreover, the closer a Filecoin Piece is closer to the upper bound, the most optimal are the associated storage costs.

Taking into account that [web3.storage](http://web3.storage) onboards any type of content (up to a maximum of 4GiB-padded shards to have better utilization of Fil sector space), multiple CAR files uploaded need to be aggregated into a bigger Piece that can be offered to Filecoin Storage Providers. w3filecoin pipeline keeps track of queued CARs (cargo) to be included in Aggregates (ferry), in order to offer these aggregates to Storage Providers. Moreover, w3filecoin operates the lifecycle of these cargo and ferries from ingestion until either succeeding landing into Filecoin deals, or failing.

## High Level design

> The high level flow for the w3filecoin Pipeline is:

Author: This is amazing! ❤️  I will add it in the document

### Schema

There are two tables within the DB Stack:
* Cargo - keeps track of cargo (CAR Files ingested by web3.storage) state
* Ferry - keeps track of aggregates state

Both tables enable an implementation of a Priority Queued based on a State Machine on top of AWS RDS.

```sql
CREATE TABLE cargo
(
	-- Filecoin Piece CID - commP of CAR file
	link TEXT PRIMARY KEY,
	-- Filecoin Piece Size
  size number NOT NULL,
	-- CAR file CID
	car_link TEXT NOT NULL,
  -- State of the cargo in the pipeline
  state CARGO_STATE NOT NULL,
  -- Priority in the queue - for now likely same as queuedAt
  priority TEXT NOT NULL,
  -- Timestamp
  inserted TIMESTAMP WITH TIME ZONE DEFAULT timezone('utc'::text, now()) NOT NULL,
  -- TODO: Maybe timestamps for other stats?
  -- Filecoin Aggregate CID - commP of commPs
  ferry_link TEXT REFERENCES ferry(link),
  -- Failed to add into aggregate code
  ferry_failed_code TEXT,
);

CREATE INDEX cargo_stat_idx ON cargo (stat);
CREATE INDEX cargo_car_link_idx ON cargo (car_link);

> CREATE INDEX cargo_aggregate_link_idx ON cargo (ferrylink);

Author: Thanks, this is great. I like the iteration based on what we talked yesterday! Ended up with a few changes

Added bucket_name and bucket_endpoint to enable us to have information to generate presigned URLs (if in the future we move out of carpark-prod-0 bucket):

```sql
CREATE TABLE content
(
  -- CAR CID
  link TEXT PRIMARY KEY,
  -- CAR Size
  size number NOT NULL,
  -- Bucket name where the CAR is
  bucket_name TEXT NOT NULL,
  -- Endpoint of the bucket
  bucket_endpoint TEXT NOT NULL,
  -- Timestamp
  inserted TIMESTAMP WITH TIME ZONE DEFAULT timezone('utc'::text, now()) NOT NULL
);
```

added timestamp for signed and processed rather than updated so that we can keep better track of the status mutations. There would also be option to have a dealSigned table, but given we will not have any processor for it, I think it is good as is

```sql
CREATE TABLE deal (
  aggregate TEXT PRIMARY KEY NOT NULL REFERENCES aggregate(link),
  status DEAL_STATUS DEFAULT 'PENDING',
  -- if status is an error this may contain details about the error e.g. json containing
  -- piece CIDs that were invalid.
  detail TEXT,
  -- Time when aggregate was send to spade-proxy
  inserted TIMESTAMP WITH TIME ZONE DEFAULT timezone('utc'::text, now()) NOT NULL,
  -- Time when aggregate was signed
  signed TIMESTAMP WITH TIME ZONE,
  -- Time when aggregate was processed
  processed TIMESTAMP WITH TIME ZONE
);
```

and finally, added a new table. We were not tracking failure reason. It can also be fetched from receipt, but for that at this level we would need to know the invocation CID, workflow and so on.
-- State for the inclusions that made deals fail
CREATE TABLE inclusion_failure {
  -- Piece CID
  piece TEXT NOT NULL REFERENCES piece(link),
  -- Aggregate CID
  aggregate TEXT NOT NULL REFERENCES aggregate(link),
  -- Failure reason
  reason TEXT NOT NULL,
  -- Time when failure was reported
  inserted TIMESTAMP WITH TIME ZONE DEFAULT timezone('utc'::text, now()) NOT NULL,

  PRIMARY KEY (aggregate, piece)
}
Other option would be to add reason in inclusion table, given it is the only new information. Any thoughts?

On the signing part of the flow, I decided to create https://github.com/web3-storage/w3filecoin/issues/29 to get that in a new iteration once we get rest of the pipeline in place

- **Content Validator process** validates CARs and writes references to a `content` table.
- On its own schedule, **Piece maker process** can pull queued content from a `content_queue`, derive piece info for them and write records to a `piece` & `inclusion` tables.
  - a `inclusion` table enables same piece to be included in another aggregate if a deal fails.
- **Agregagtor process** reads from a `cargo_queue` (backed by `inclusion` table), attempts to create an aggregate and if successful it writes to an `aggregate` table.
- **Submission process** reads from the `aggregate_queue`, submits aggregates to the agency (spade proxy) and writes deal record with status "PENDING".
- TBD deal flow

![Pipeline processes](./processes.png)

The w3filecoin pipeline is modeled into 4 different SST Stacks that will have their infrastructure provisioned in AWS via AWS CloudFormation. These are:

- API Stack
- Consumer Stack
- DB Stack
- Processor Stack

![Architecture](./architecture.png)

## API Stack

TBC
API Gateway to expose:
- Report API for failed aggregates to land into Storage Providers
- Get to know state of deals
- ...

## Consumer Stack

> w3filecoin relies on events from Buckets once CAR files are written into them. It is designed to enable multiple sources of CAR files to be easily integrated into the pipeline via its consumer stack.

Reviewer: I think it might be a good idea to decouple it from bucket events and simply have a mechanism for adding things into consumer pipeline. This way S3 buckets events could be one source of events, but we could also swap or introduce other event source e.g switch to R2 and use content claim invocation as a trigger.

Author: I will add this once we get the implementation part. Now dropping the details

As an example, w3filecoin is wired up with `w3infra` as a source of CAR files to get into Filecoin deals. `w3infra` will emit events once CAR files are written into desired buckets. This events should include necessary information of the location of the CAR file to enable w3filecoin to let Storage Providers know where they can fetch the CAR files from.

Further down the line, consumer stack can be wired with the UCAN Log Stream and use receipts as the trigger.

## DB Stack

The DB stack relies on Amazon RDS Database to keep the necessary state for the w3filecoin pipeline. Its data model was designed with the aim of being the data structure for each of the processors running within the pipeline, while also enabling the tracking of state of each item in the pipeline and to get a mapping between content CIDs and piece CIDs.

### Schema

```sql
-- Table describes queue of verified CARs to be stored in filecoin
-- CAR is considered in queue when there is no piece referencing it
CREATE TABLE content
(
  -- CAR CID
  link TEXT PRIMARY KEY,
  -- CAR Size
  size number NOT NULL,
  -- Source where the content can be fetched from

>   source JSONB NOT NULL,

Reviewer: I'm not sure I understand what JSON document look like here, mind adding a comment so it's clear. We also may have to consider what to do if malformed record is encountered (which seems more likely with arbitrary JSONs over time) so that whole processing pipeline does not get stack if one bad record makes it into the table.

>   source JSONB NOT NULL,

Author: I added. And yes, whoever writes the content should validate this (consumer stack)

-- derivation and in that case another correct piece will reference the same content.
CREATE TABLE piece
(
  -- Piece CID
  link TEXT NOT NULL PRIMARY KEY,
  -- Piece size
  size number NOT NULL,
  -- Reference to the content of this piece (CAR CID).
  content TEXT NOT NULL REFERENCES content(link),
  -- Time when the piece was derived from the content
  inserted TIMESTAMP WITH TIME ZONE DEFAULT timezone('utc'::text, now()) NOT NULL
);

CREATE INDEX piece_content_idx ON piece (content);
CREATE INDEX piece_inserted_idx ON piece (inserted);

-- Content for which we need to derive piece CIDs. We will have a process that
-- reads from this queue and writes into `piece` table.
CREATE VIEW content_queue AS
  SELECT content.*
  FROM content
  LEFT OUTER JOIN piece ON content.link = piece.content
  WHERE piece.content IS NULL
  ORDER BY piece.inserted;

-- Table describing pieces to be included into aggregates. If aggregate is NULL then the
-- piece is queued for the aggregation.
CREATE TABLE inclusion
(
  -- Piece CID. Notice that it is not unique because in case of bad piece
  -- aggregate will be rejected and good pieces will be written back here
  -- to be included into new aggregate

>   piece TEXT NOT NULL REFERENCES piece(link),

Reviewer: Should we have an index for on `piece.link` as well ?

Author: `piece.link` is the primary key for `piece`. SO already have the index

  
  -- Aggregate CID, if NULL the the piece is queued for the aggregation
  aggregate TEXT REFERENCES aggregate(link) NULL,

  -- Priority in the queue. I think it could be a counter on initial inserts hence
  --  providing FIFO order. When piece is retried (after aggregate is rejected)
  -- we could keep original priority hence prioritizing it over new items yet
  -- keeping original FIFO order among rejects.

>   priority TEXT NOT NULL,

Reviewer: To do what comment describes we need some auto-incrementing counter field.

Author: It is not clear yet how priority would work. It would not be an auto-incrementing counter given it is not a table with just auto increment on insert. Made it a number

  -- Time when the piece was added to the queue.
  inserted TIMESTAMP WITH TIME ZONE DEFAULT timezone('utc'::text, now()) NOT NULL,

  -- Piece may end up in multiple aggregates e.g. if aggregate was rejected
  PRIMARY KEY (aggregate, piece)

   -- We may also want to write inclusion proof here
);

> CREATE INDEX inclusion_inserted_idx ON inclusion (inserted);

Reviewer: Not sure why we need this given that we'll be sorting by `priority`, should we index that instead ?

Author: included priority

-- Table for created aggregates. 
CREATE TABLE aggregate
(
  -- commP of the aggregate (commP of the commPs)
  link TEXT PRIMARY KEY NOT NULL,
  -- Aggregate size
  size number NOT NULL,
  -- Time when the aggregate was created
  inserted TIMESTAMP WITH TIME ZONE DEFAULT timezone('utc'::text, now()) NOT NULL
);

-- View for inclusion records that do not have an aggregate.
CREATE VIEW cargo AS
  SELECT *
  FROM inclusion
  WHERE aggregate IS NULL
  ORDER BY inserted;

-- State of aggregate deals. When aggregate is sent to spade-proxy status is 'PENDING'.
-- When spade-proxy requests a wallet signature, status will be updated to 'SIGNED'. Once
-- deal is accepted status changes to `APPROVED`, but if deal fails status will be set to
-- `REJECTED`.
CREATE TABLE deal (
  aggregate TEXT PRIMARY KEY NOT NULL REFERENCES aggregate(link),
  status DEAL_STATUS DEFAULT 'PENDING',
  -- if status is an error this may contain details about the error e.g. json containing
  -- piece CIDs that were invalid.

>   detail TEXT,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  detail JSONB,
```

Probably makes more sense here

  -- Time when aggregate was send to spade-proxy
  inserted TIMESTAMP WITH TIME ZONE DEFAULT timezone('utc'::text, now()) NOT NULL,
  -- Time when aggregate was signed
  signed TIMESTAMP WITH TIME ZONE,
  -- Time when aggregate was processed

>   processed TIMESTAMP WITH TIME ZONE

Reviewer: Does processed here implies when it became either `APPROVED` or `REJECTED` ? It may be good idea to add comment to that effect to make it clear.

);

CREATE INDEX deal_inserted_idx ON deal (inserted);
CREATE INDEX deal_signed_idx ON deal (signed);
CREATE INDEX deal_signed_idx ON deal (signed);
CREATE INDEX deal_status_idx ON deal (status);

CREATE TYPE DEAL_STATUS AS ENUM
(
  'PENDING',
  'SIGNED',
  'APPROVED',
  'REJECTED'
);

-- View of aggregates to be submitted to spade, that is all aggregates that we do not
-- have deal records for.
CREATE VIEW aggregate_queue AS
  SELECT aggregate.*
  FROM aggregate
  LEFT OUTER JOIN deal ON aggregate.link = deal.aggregate
  WHERE deal.aggregate IS NULL;

-- View for deals pending.
CREATE VIEW deal_pending AS
  SELECT *
  FROM deal
  WHERE status = "PENDING"
  ORDER BY inserted;

-- View for deals approved by storage providers.
CREATE VIEW deal_approved AS
  SELECT *
  FROM deal
  WHERE status = "APPROVED"
  ORDER BY processed;

-- View for deals rejected by storage providers.
CREATE VIEW deal_rejected AS
  SELECT *
  FROM deal
  WHERE status = "REJECTED"
  ORDER BY processed;
```

![DB Schema](./db-schema.png)
https://dbdiagram.io/d/649af07402bd1c4a5e249feb

## Processor Stack

> The w3infra processor stack manages the deployed schedulers that invoke lambda functions to consume the DB stack queues and attempt to make progress in their items to the following stages of the pipeline.

Reviewer: I would rephrase it as follows

```suggestion
The w3infra processor stack manages several concurrent workflows, deployed as lambda functions, that move items from one stage of the pipeline into another. Each workflow operates independently and on its own schedule, pulling items from one DB stack queue, and pushing into another after some processing.
```

Each of the schedulers might have their own schedules and can act independently of each other.

> The processes running in these pipeline are:

Reviewer: I would suggest using term `workflow` in place of `process` as later tends to  different things depending on context (which is also why UCANs end up embracing workflow as a term).
